---
layout: post
title: Mind on Statistics (6th. Ed) Chapter 7 - Probability
author: Arpon Sarker
date: 2025-08-08 11:45:58
categories: [statistics]
tags: [mathematics, statistics]
---

## Introduction
- Describe the relative frequency interpretation of probability, the personal probability interpretation, and situations where each interpretation is appropriate
- Recognise mutually exclusive and independent events
- Calculate probabilities using the addition and multiplication rules, including conditional probabilities
- Calculate probabilities using various tools, including tree diagrams, hypothetical hundred thousand table, and Bayes' Rule
- Define vocabulary terms for medical screening tests, including sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, disease prevalence, and disease incidence
- Demonstrate how to estimate probabilities using simulation
- Identify situations that produce flawed intuitive judgements about probability

## Random Circumstances
> **Random Circumstance:** is one in which the outcome is unpredictable (not determined until we observe it)

## Interpretations of Probability
### Relative 
> **Relative Frequency Interpretation:** applies to situations in which we can imagine repeatedly observing the results of a random circumstance. 

> **Relative Frequency:** For situations that we can imagine repeating many times, we define the *probability* of a specific outcome as the proportion of times it would occur over the long run. This also is called the **relative frequency** of that particular outcome.

The relative frequency probability is determined by either making an assumption about the physical world (e.g. coin toss) or making a direct observation of how often something happens.

### Personal
> **Personal Probability:** of an event is the degree to which an individual believes that the event will happen. Sometimes, the term **subjective probability** is used because the degree of belief may be different for each individual.

If the situation is not repeatable, we use personal otherwise relative.

## Probability Definitions

> **Simple Event:** a unique possible outcome of a random circumstance.

> **Sample Space:** is the collection of all simple events for a random circumstance.

> **Compound Event:** is an event that includes two or more simple events.

> **Event:** is any collection of one or more simple events in the sample space and can be simple or compound. Often written as capital letters.

> **Complementary Event:** if the two event do not contain any of the same simple events and together they cover the entire sample space. $A^C$ is the complement of $A$.

> **Mutually Exclusive/ Disjoint:** if the two events do not contain any of the same simple events (outcomes). (does not cover the entire sample space)

> **Independent:** if knowing one event will occur does not change the probability that the other occurs for two events.
- The physical situation makes it clear that knowing $A$ does not change probability $B$ will occur.
- If conditional probability is the same as unconditional probability
- $P(A \textrm{ and } B) = P(A)P(B)$

> **Conditional Probability:** is the long-run relative frequency with which $B$ occurs when $A$ has occured or will occur. $P(B|A)$

## Probability Rules

Complement Rule:
$$
P(A^C) = 1 - P(A)
$$

Addition Rule (can extend to more than two events):
$$
P(A \textrm{ or } B) = P(A) + P(B) - P(A \textrm{ and } B)\\
P(A \textrm{ or } B, \textrm{ if mutually exclusive}) = P(A) + P(B)\\ 
$$

Multiplication Rule (can extend to more than two events):
$$
P(A \textrm{ and } B) = P(A)P(B|A) = P(B)P(A|B)\\
P(A \textrm{ and } B, \textrm{ if independent}) = P(A)P(B)
$$

$$
P(\textrm{at least once}) = 1 - P(\textrm{none})
$$

## Language for Medical Screening Tests
> **Sensitivity:** the probability of a postive test result when the patient has a disease

> **Specificity:** the probability of a negative test result when the patient does not have the disease.

> **Positive Predictive Value (PPV):** probability patient with a positive test result actually has the disease

> **Negative Predictive Value (NPV):** probability patient with a negative test result does not have the disease

> **Prevalence:** proportion of population that has the disease

> **Incidence:** number/proportion of newly diagnosed cases of a disease in a specified time period.

## Using Simulation to Estimate Probabilities
Simulate using a computer where the estimated probability is $\frac{x}{n}$ where $x$ is the relative frequency of event of interest for $n$ times. The conservative margin of error is $1/\sqrt{n}$.

## Flawed Intuitive Judgements about Probability
- Confusion of the Inverse
- Specific People vs. Random Individuals
- Coincidences (a surprising concurrence of events, perceived as meaningfully related, with no apparent causal connection)
- **Gambler's Fallacy**
- **Law of Small Numbers**
