---
layout: post
title: I want to Concentrate by Harriet Griffey
author: Arpon Sarker
date: 2025-07-22 14:59:28
categories: [linear_algebra]
tags: [self_help]
---

## Introduction
This book was borrowed from my BCC library and is quite a short 137-page book. I usually talk about computer science and mathematics on this blog but I was thoroughly surprised when I picked up quite a few novel concepts.

> Continuous Partial Attention (CPA) 

coined by Ex-Apple and Microsoft consultant Linda Stone refers to being aware and taking in many stimulus at once rather than fully concentrating one thing. "We live in a constant state of alertness that scans the world, but never really gives our full attention to anything."

> Turn off notifications

I thought I never had to do this since I don't use social media often but I still get quite a few notifications from applications and services that from now on I will have to put on Do Not Disturb mode. Thankfully, Apple devices synchronise this throughout all devices.

> Meditation Practice

1. Lie comfortably on the floor, knees bent, chin tucked in - what Alexander Technique teachers call the 'constructive rest position' - or sit upright in a chair, legs uncrossed, feet flat on the floor.
2. Consciously relax your neck and drop your shoulders, rest your arms by your sides with your palms turned upwards.
3. Breathe long and gently through your nose, into your bell, until you see it gently rise, for a slow count of 5.
4. Pause, and hold that breath for a count of 5, then gently exhale through your mouth for another count of 5.
5. Repeat for 10 cycles.

While doing this, try to clear your mind of all other throughts, or close your eyes and visualise a pebble dropping into a pool of water and gently sinking down.

> Stage 2 of Sleep

In this phase, we are susceptible to 'hypnagogic startles', when you are unexpectedly jolted awake by a muscular jerk. It serves no purpose and does no damage.

> Learning to Concentrate

This is based on Preparation: identification of personal focus for a definite period of time and create a physical and mental space to concentrate, Engagement: you need to allow time to reach peak concentration (15 minutes to reach a good level of concentration after an interruption), and Motivation: to think about what factors might be hindering me and those that might help.

> Flow

Flow occurs at the border between alpha (8-12Hz) and theta (4-8Hz) brainwaves, the intersection between the conscious and subconscious. Most importantly, it comes from deep confidence which is **the result of long practice or application.**

> Take things slow

Leave holes in day rather than filling everything with some activity, set aside a time of day to turn of all technology, and make time for at least one hobby that slows you down. (e.g. reading, painting, gardening, yoga, piano?)

> Concentrating on nothing

Keep a notebook handy to allow subconscious connections to shift and connect - this activity is for creativity.

> **Techniques to Practice Concentration**

- 5 more rule: progressive overload where whenever you feel like quitting, you do 5 more minutes, exercies or pages to extend your focus
- Press Pause: Utilise timers to set a 'time out' where you do nothing.
- Sitting still: Sit still and do nothing as a 'pause' between activities to re-centre.
- Counting numbers backwards: from 1000 and subtract by 7
- Spelling words backwards

> **Specific Exercise to Focus the Mind**

- Focus: Sit in a comfortable position and find a spot on the wall to focus on with your eyes. Let any thoughts that arise, drift away and you can st a timer for 3 minutes.
- Watching the clock: same thing as focus but looking at second hand going around face starting from 12.
- Visualisation: Pay more attention to what you are looking at and engage with it and understand its details and after some time you can close your eyes and visualise it.
- Listening attentively: Really listen to the nuances of whatever music you are listening to.
